You are listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, click the link in the show notes or go to FBCWN.org.
Today's message comes from Senior Pastor, Dr. Bob McCartney.
Let's open our Bibles this morning to John Chapter 11.
John Chapter 11, I'll begin reading in just a few minutes at verse 17.
I'm beginning a new series of messages rooted in a line from perhaps the most famous poem on all the world.
Perhaps Psalm 23 is the most famous piece of poetry ever written.
And there is that line in verse four, even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil for you are with me.
For the next few weeks, we're going to take a journey and that journey is going to take us to places that we would prefer not to go.
We are going to go into the valley.
And there are a lot of different types of valleys that we have to journey through in the course of our life.
We're going to talk about some of those valleys.
we're going to talk about some low points in life.
And we want to answer the question, where is God when life is at its lowest moment?
Those are questions that are big and they're real.
And so we're going to focus on some of those, but the context of Psalm 23 verse four is the valley of the shadow of death.
And so today we're going to talk about facing death with faith.
In September of 2022, the world was shocked with the news that Queen Elizabeth II had died.
Now, we weren't shocked at her age.
She was 96 years old.
We weren't shocked because she had been on the throne of the British Empire for 70 years, but it was interesting to hear the reactions of people.
Most of her subjects, most of the people in Great Britain,
had never known another monarch.
I mean, you had to, had to be probably past 75 or 76 years old to even have any vague memory of the former king, Queen Elizabeth's father, and that transition of power.
Most people had seen her as the only queen they had ever known.
Because of that, their reactions varied from sadness to stunned.
One lady who was interviewed said, you can't
actually imagine her not being there.
Former British Prime Minister Boris Johnson said, I just always thought she'd be there.
Now this is a 96 year old woman and we understand that death happens and yet when it does come there is a sense of sadness, of denial, of confusion,
and sometimes anger.
So we want to talk about the valley of the shadow of death.
And there's a reason for that.
First of all, all of us are going to lose someone.
If you live long enough, you're going to experience the pain of loss and grief.
And so we want to know how as a follower of Jesus, how do I navigate that?
How do I deal with the loss of grandparents and parents of a spouse?
How would I navigate the loss of a child?
And all of us are going to experience loss and grief.
But the second reality is that all of us are going to face death personally.
Unless the Lord Jesus returns, and that's our hope and prayer, all of us are going to face death someday.
And so we want to know how do we do that with faith.
In John chapter 11, we have this incredible moment.
Jesus receives word that someone who is a very, very close friend is sick.
And I don't mean he has a bad cold and doesn't feel well.
I mean, he is sick unto death.
He is at death's door.
His name is Lazarus.
This is not the same Lazarus who is in the story of Lazarus and the rich man, different Lazarus.
It was a very common name.
But Jesus was very close to this family.
The little village that they lived in Bethany is less than two miles from Jerusalem.
And so it seems that when Jesus would travel to Jerusalem in the late afternoon and early evening, he would retreat and walk to Bethany, and he would stay in the home of Mary and Martha, the sisters, and Lazarus, their brother.
These are people that he had laughed with.
These are people he had ate meals with.
These are people who had helped him with a place to stay.
And so what we expect is
that when Jesus gets word that Lazarus, your friend, the one whom you love dearly is deathly ill. We expect Jesus to drop everything and rush to Lazarus side.
And that is not what happens.
Jesus looks at his disciples and he says, the end of this is not death.
Don't worry about it.
We'll get there when we get there.
And finally they decide to go.
But by the time they get there, Lazarus has been dead and laid in a tomb for four days.
And so we pick up this story in verse 17.
And let's read the first portion of this story.
And then I'm going to work my way through it because the text is fairly lengthy.
Look at verse 17.
So when Jesus came,
He found that he had already been in the tomb four days.
Now, Bethany was near Jerusalem, about 15, stayed away, and many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary to console them about their brother.
So then Martha, when she heard that Jesus was coming, went to meet him, but Mary stayed in the house.
Martha then said to Jesus, Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
And even now, I know whatever you ask of God, he will give you.
Jesus said to her, your brother will rise from the dead.
Martha said to him, I know he will rise in the resurrection on the last day.
Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection and the life.
The one who believes in me will live even if he dies.
And everyone who lives and believes in me will never die.
Do you believe this?"
And she said to him, yes, Lord, I have come to believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, and He who comes into the world.
The first principle that I want us to draw from this incredible biblical story
In order to face death with faith is this, hold on to your faith amid loss.
When you are in the middle of a swirling circumstance that causes your head to spend because someone you love has died, you need to struggle to hang on to your faith.
Now Martha and Mary have very different personalities.
There are a couple of stories in the New Testament that reveal that to us.
Martha is always the one who is a little louder.
Mary is a little quieter.
Martha is a doer and Mary is a feeler.
And so when you see that and experience that in this story, you'll understand a little bit about why.
When Martha hears that Jesus has arrived at Bethany, she jumps up and goes out to meet him.
But Mary remains in the house mourning quietly.
And so she comes out to meet him.
And what we see in Martha's statement is interesting.
There is a bit of confrontation in that statement.
Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
There's a little bit of disappointment in that statement when she says, Lord, you could have done something and you didn't.
All of us are going to face deaths where we could say those words.
Lord, if you would have been here, someone wouldn't have died.
This circumstance would be different.
Lord, if you'd shown up.
But while there is a bit of confrontation in that statement, there's also a confirmation in that statement.
First of all, she calls him Lord.
And so there's something about the authority that she believes he has, but there's also a faith that she has that says you could have made this different.
You have the power to make this different.
You see there?
While there's a little anger and there's a little disappointment, there is also still a moment of faith.
There is something in Martha's heart that says, Lord, you have the power.
Jesus, you can make this different.
And she says this, even now, even now, I know that whatever you ask of God, he'll give you.
Now that's a significant statement
if you understand what Jewish people believed.
Now I want you to understand that what I'm about to share with you is not biblically true, but it was a widely held belief among Jewish people.
They believed and many of the rabbis taught when someone died that their spirit hovered near the body for three days.
And after the third day,
All hope was lost.
That spirit had to depart to the realm of the dead.
And there was no hope.
Well, it is significant that Jesus waits until the fourth day.
This is really important in the story.
It's not just chronology.
It's not just the passage of time.
Jesus is going to crush a false belief.
And so,
She says to him, even now, even after four days, I know whatever you ask of God, he'll give you.
And I know that my brother and Jesus says, your brother will rise again.
She says, I know in the resurrection on the last day that I'll see him again.
She has faith that someday she'll see him again.
And then Jesus makes really what is the climactic statement of the passage, but there's a lot more to the story we'll get to.
when he says, Martha, I am the resurrection.
I am the life.
Jesus is saying the resurrection isn't just an event.
The resurrection is wrapped up in a person and Jesus says, I am that person.
You see, resurrection doesn't just happen.
You can meet people every day
who believe they're gonna see their loved ones again.
Because they believe there's a heaven and they believe they're going.
But if you ask them specifically, what is that rooted in?
They cannot tell you it's rooted in Jesus.
The resurrection hope is only found in a relationship with Jesus Christ.
It's not just an event.
The resurrection is a person.
Jesus says,
And you know what Martha?
Everyone who believes in me will live even if they die.
And everyone who lives and believes in me will never die.
Now those aren't contradictory statements.
What Jesus is saying is there's a part of you, this part right here, this part that you can feel and touch and see and hug and kiss on the cheek
That part is going to die.
But it can live again by resurrection.
But there is a part of you.
There is a part of every one of you that will never die.
And that's the part, that's the unseen part of you.
That's your spirit and soul.
And that part of you that dies can live again by resurrection.
But there is a part of you once it is made alive in Christ that will never die.
That's what Jesus is saying because that part of you will depart from the body when it dies and go to be in the presence of the Lord.
And then Jesus asked her a question and I'm going to tell you it's the singular, most important question that's ever been asked.
In my opinion, from the Bible, it is the bottom line question of all of life.
Do you believe this?
And your answer to that question makes all the difference.
You see, what Jesus is calling on Martha to do is Martha, in the midst of this loss, in the midst of this pain, hold on to your faith.
Don't let it go.
Pain, grief, loss has a way of putting
a puncture in our faith, like a pinhole in a balloon.
And it can leak away.
Levi Lusco is a pastor.
In 2012, his five-year-old daughter, Lina, had an asthma attack.
She stopped breathing.
They started CPR.
And five-year-old Lina died in his arms.
There is nothing.
I've been a pastor for a long time and I'm going to tell you, the loss of a child is the absolute worst thing I have ever tried to help people navigate.
There is nothing like it, nothing.
And Levi and his wife worked through that.
You know, the stats are not good for couples when they lose a child.
The divorce right, skyrockets.
But they decided, we're not going to let go.
And they clung to one another.
And they're still married today.
He said, I stood at her grave side.
And I said these words, Christ, you are resurrection and you are life.
He said, I had to repeat those words to myself over and over as I buried my five year old daughter.
And from that moment, his faith, though it was wounded and hurting, was buoyed.
It was lifted because he came to learn that
The resurrection isn't just for someday.
Resurrection power is for every day.
And it is to help you through the losses of life.
You see, standing at a grave site and saying that is not some cheap religious platitude, that is faith, that is forged in a fire.
That's what that is.
Hold on to your faith in the midst of loss.
And that's what Martha does, by the way.
Martha says to him, yes, Lord, I have come to believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, he who comes into the world.
So Martha hangs on to her faith in the midst of loss.
Second, allow Jesus to meet you in your grief.
Allow Jesus to meet you in your grief.
Now look at verse 28.
When she had said this, she left and she called Mary, her sister, saying secretly,
The teacher is here and he's calling for you.
And when she heard this, she got up quickly and came to him.
Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was still at the place where Martha met him.
Then the Jews who were with her in the house and were consoling her, when they saw that Mary had gotten up quickly and left, they followed her thinking that she was going to the tomb to weep there.
So then Mary came to the place where Jesus was and
She saw him and fell at his feet saying to him, Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
Therefore, when Jesus saw her weeping and the Jews who came with her also weeping, he was deeply moved in spirit and was troubled.
And he said, where have you laid him?
And they said to him, Lord, come and see Jesus' weapon.
So the Jews were saying, see how he loved him.
But some of them said, could this man who opened the eyes of a man who was blind not have also kept this man from dying?
The second principle is allow Jesus to meet you in your grief.
Jesus enters into the grief of Mary and Martha.
And when Mary hears that Jesus is there, she goes to meet Him and she says to Him, Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
Now I'm going to tell you something.
If two people come to you separately with the same complaint and say the same thing, they've been talking.
I'll guarantee you that.
And by the way, the crowd of mourners, they say exactly the same thing.
Could not this man who opened blind eyes have also saved this man from dying?
They've all been talking about it.
And yet Jesus comes to meet them in their grief.
The word for weeping that is used when it refers to Martha and to Mary,
and to that crowd of mourners is a word that we would better translate wailing.
Morning in the ancient world of the Middle East was always done with loud cries.
They let their grief out.
You know, we civilized 21st century middle-class Americans.
We kind of hold it in, but they let it out.
and they grieve out loud.
And Jesus comes and he enters into their grief.
In verse 35, that shortest of verses in the Bible, Jesus wept.
He came to grieve with them.
That's interesting that there are two words that are used for weeping in this passage.
The word that is used
for Martha and Mary and the crowd is that word for loud wailing.
The word that is used of Jesus when it says Jesus' whip is actually only used one time in the entire New Testament.
It's the only place it's used and it means a quiet cry.
It's that picture of someone who's choked up, who's on the verge of tears.
And the Bible tells us that Jesus
was deeply moved in his spirit and he was troubled.
He enters into the pain of these mourners.
This is a picture, not of weakness, but of divine compassion that Jesus comes alongside us when we grieve.
Psalm 34 verse 18 says, the Lord is near to the brokenhearted and he saves those who are crushed in spirit.
in September of 2022, Hurricane Ian swept onto the southwest coast of Florida, and there were storm surges that wiped out entire towns, that wiped out entire neighborhoods of homes.
And as the people began to clean that up, and they began to realize they had lost everything materially that they had ever collected, there were these
Christian relief agencies that came in, you helped sponsor some of those through your offerings.
We send part of our offering to send relief and to the North American Mission Board and to the International Mission Board to help relieve the pain of those moments and those big send relief trucks and Texans on mission trucks roll in to those places to feed people and to help them.
There was an interview with one man who had lost everything and he says,
The best thing that happened to me is he stood in the debris of his home.
He said, the best thing that happened to me was not somebody who came and helped me clean this stuff up.
But someone with a yellow hat on came and they knelt down beside me and they prayed for me and they cried with me.
Sometimes it's not solutions that people are looking for.
It's compassion.
that they're looking for.
It's what they need.
And so allow Jesus to meet you in your grave.
You can do more than grieve after you grieve, but first you must give voice to your grief.
Third and finally, resurrection hope overpowers the grave.
Look at verse 38, resurrection hope overpowers the grave.
So Jesus again, being deeply moved within came to the tomb.
That was a cave and a stone was lying against it.
And Jesus said, remove the stone.
Martha, the sister of the deceased said to him, Lord, by this time there will be a stench for he has been dead for four days.
Jesus said to her, did I not say to you?
that if you believe, you will see the glory of God.
So they removed the stone and Jesus raised his eyes and said, Father, I thank you that you have heard me, but I knew that you always hear me.
Nevertheless, because of the people standing around, I said it so that they may believe that you sent me.
And when he heard and when he said these things, he cried out with a loud voice, Lazarus, come out.
And out came the man who had died, bound, hand and foot with wrappings, and his face was wrapped around with cloth.
And Jesus said, unbind him and let him go.
Victory over death.
You see, resurrection hope overpowers the grave.
Pardon me.
Jesus, the Bible says, is deeply moved and he takes action.
He says, remove the stone, roll it away.
Now, Jesus could have just with the twitch of his finger and his almighty power could I guess could have just rolled that stone away, but he asked for help to do that.
It's interesting.
He says, I want you to roll the stone away, but Martha object, she says, or there will be a terrible smell if we roll this stone away.
I mean, look, the Egyptians, embalmed, they mummified bodies.
the Israelites and the Jewish people didn't do that.
They simply took a body and laid it in the tomb and in the heat of the arid climate of Israel, bodies began to decompose really quick.
And there would be an awful, awful smell.
And Jesus says, no, I want you to roll that stone away.
I know you think this is hopeless, but then Jesus prays a prayer.
And Jesus prays that prayer
so that there could be no doubt about it that God had answered that prayer and God performed the miracle.
And so Jesus calls for Lazarus to come out of that tomb and Lazarus comes out wrapped around with the cloths that would have been wrapped around a dead body and he comes walking out of that tomb.
You see what Jesus does in that moment is he proves
that he will be victorious over the final enemy.
That's what 1 Corinthians 1526 calls death.
The last enemy to be destroyed is death.
And someday death is going to be destroyed.
This past week, we saw the incredible story of hostages being released from that Hamas terrorist group in Palestine.
One of those was a man named
Etaar David.
And Etaar David was taken hostage from the Nova Music Festival on November 7th, 2023, when those Palestinian terrorists cut through that fence and came across.
He was one of the first people taken and he had been in captivity all that time.
But one of the things that those terrorists did to him was they videotaped him and they gave him a script.
They told him what he had to say.
And they videotaped him digging his own grave.
They made him dig his own grave.
And he was telling the people, you have to negotiate, you have to withdraw.
He's reading this Hamas script that they had given him.
And he's literally digging his own grave.
He's saying, they're going to kill me if you don't surrender.
And when David came back and he walked out, it was as if a man came back from the dead.
He looked like a skeleton that was animated with skin on it.
He was so frail and so weak that he could hardly stand on his own.
Folks, there's a greater miracle than that in this passage.
And it is the miracle that Jesus called forth a man who had been dead for four days.
He hadn't dug his own grave.
He'd been in one for four days.
And Jesus demonstrates
through this resurrection sign miracle that a greater resurrection is coming.
A greater resurrection is coming in that he will give his own life.
He will surrender his life.
Nobody killed him, nobody executed him, nobody assassinated him.
Jesus gave his life and he laid it down so that he could take it back up again.
In Acts chapter two, verse 24,
Peter says, but God raised him up again, putting an end to the agony of death since it was impossible for him to be held by its power.
You see, the power that death has over us is sin.
But when a sinless sacrifice dies, death has no authority to hold him, so he
defeats death.
Jesus went to the tomb to beat death to death.
And he comes forth on that first Easter.
Our hope is not rooted in the vain, perhaps silly belief, maybe.
that God would cause grandma to come back from the dead.
You know, I wonder if Lazarus, who was righteous man, who had gone to a place of peace and comfort, thought, why did you bring me back to this sin-soaked world?
I mean, have you ever thought about it this way?
Lazarus had to die twice.
Eventually he would die again.
And yet Jesus offers us a very real hope, a resurrection hope that overcomes death.
This is how you face death with faith.
You come to the understanding that someday resurrection means reunion.
That's how Levi Lusco coped with the death of his five-year-old daughter.
That's how those of us who have experienced the searing loss of sudden death, or even an anticipated death.
This is how you hang on to hope.
Resurrection means reunions.
for those who've trusted Christ.
You've been listening to a message from First Baptist Church, which is not false.
For more information about First Baptist, including gathering times and locations, click the link in the show notes or go to FBCWF.org.
We'll see you next week.